Well, good morning, Rich Woods.
This is one thing that I am for certain.
Almost every single one of us would agree.
Our lives are loud, and we are weary.
Anybody else feel that?
Our lives are loud, and we
Our weary, my good friend Ali says the word tender.
We're just a tender people.
And as people, we live in constant information, right?
Some we go out and get, some is just constantly given to us, but we are constantly surrounded by noise.
And that noise takes on at different things.
But one of the things that I know is that we have so much information coming at us all the time.
And what we sometimes want is quiet.
And what that looks like sometimes is compassion.
And as Darren said, that's what we are going to be talking about today.
Because as people, we're surrounded by things like opinions and outrage and advice
and content and thoughts and voices and phones.
And I could go on and on and on.
And this leads itself to our selfish nature.
Which, if anybody is in the room and was like, what?
We're selfish.
Sorry.
Right?
It's how we're created.
But that selfishness sometimes pushes us to walk by things like this.
We can feel completely alone in a crowd like we're in today or somewhere like this.
And because of the constant stimulation, we just settle in.
We say, okay, we give up and we become numb.
And the noise that makes us feel so safe that we just continue on with that exchange and we just stay
completely plugged in to this.
Now none of us in this room are surprised.
Yet more people than ever are anxious and unseen and directionless and exhausted and alone.
And the saddest part about that is this isn't adults, friends.
This isn't just our adults.
We see kids
eight years old, 10 years old, nine years old, taking their own lives, and why?
Because they feel alone.
Because no one really saw them.
Well, today in our host passage, we're gonna see and Matthew this idea of Jesus looking at a crowd.
And weirdly enough, the crowd that he saw all those thousands of years ago looks very similar to the crowd we see today.
Because they were people, just like us.
And they did things just like we do, but how Jesus reacts to them and sees them is a little bit different than what we do today.
See, he doesn't look at the crowd when he comes on them.
He's going to the Sermon on the Mount and he goes up there and there's all these people following him, which they have been for days.
And he says, what is wrong with you people?
Why are you following me?
No.
He doesn't look at the crowd and roll his eyes.
Any other eye rollers out here?
I'm one of them, so I feel very convicted right now.
He doesn't call them lazy.
He doesn't just announce for them to suck it up or try harder.
This shows compassion in everything that he does because this is our Jesus.
So Matthew 9, 36, it says, when he saw the crowds,
He had compassion on them because they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd.
Now harassed and helpless maybe aren't used necessarily so frequent in our language, but we say things that mean the same thing.
And actually the longer that the world is in the state that it's in, these actually do become more said.
Now if we go at the very beginning, when he saw the crowds, this phrase really matters.
Because it tells us how Jesus saw people.
He saw them with compassion.
So before we go any further, I want to kind of define what this idea of compassion means.
Because we have a lot of things that we use the word compassion for that actually might be empathy.
It might be gentleness.
It might be something else.
And what we want to talk about today is compassion.
So I'm going to put this
Greek word for compassion that we see all over the gospels.
And we're going to talk about that.
But I'm going to put it on the screen because I'm not going to say it out loud because it really is funny.
Here we go.
Splagno, am I, right?
That's how you say it.
We're just going to leave it there because actually I don't speak Greek, so we're just going to leave it there.
But here's what this means.
This word Matthew uses in the Scripture when he writes literally first to a gut reaction.
the inner most part of his body, a deep seated emotion.
So what we see when Jesus saw the crowd is he says he saw the crowd and he had compassion on them.
What it doesn't say is he was mildly concerned about them.
What it doesn't say is he kind of thought about what he might do for them.
He moves.
He moves in this gut deep physical, eternal reaction.
And that is the same word that we see multiple times in the gospels.
In Matthew 141, we see the leperate says, moved with compassion, this same word.
Jesus reached out and touched him.
Jesus sees the man.
He moves towards the man.
And then his compassion heals him.
He touches and he heals what was considered untouchable and unredeemable.
Do we do that in our lives?
Do we actually make emotion and a movement towards people that we feel don't deserve it?
And the answer is we don't.
In Matthew 14, 14, we see him feeding the crowd and he has compassion.
Same word on them and healed their sick.
You know what was happening when Jesus was on the mountain?
He was tired.
Just like us, he had a human body just like us.
And he was tired.
He wanted rest.
But you know what we know about compassion?
Sometimes compassion interrupts our plans.
Sometimes, and we see this in Scripture, compassion interrupts Jesus' plans.
Because the truth of the matter is compassion can be inconvenient.
And it's costly.
But compassion is what we want to move.
This is a motion that demands a response because the truth is compassion is love that moves towards suffering.
And that is what we're going to capture all of our message about today.
It's this idea that we can't have compassion and not move towards suffering.
It is seeing pain and refusing to stay unchanged.
It's action.
It's intentional and it's on purpose.
So I thought of a couple real life ways that we might see something like this.
Imagine seeing a child, small child, standing alone in a busy parking lot by himself crying.
You don't just stop and analyze and wait for a minute.
Maybe a split second to see if mom is like around, or dad is like around the car.
But for the most part, what would most of us do?
Go see what's going on, right?
I would be the one to say, are you kidnapping that child?
Because I probably would just grab it and be like, I don't know, we'll figure it out later.
You move towards it.
What about that phone call?
Whether you know it's bad news, whether you're expecting bad news, you see that one name, that one time a day, you just know.
It's a gut reaction.
Right?
You know that there's bad news on the other line.
It moves you.
It makes you physically feel sick.
And this is the idea of compassion that we see in the scripture.
That's stirring that gut-level pull.
It's compassion.
It actually won't let you walk away.
And this is what Matthew means when he says that Jesus has compassion.
Through this entire series, we've talked about a few other things like empathy and gentleness and proximity.
So I wanted to make sure that we all know the difference of how all of those play together, because the truth of the matter is they do.
They all play together.
Because if we're going to take on the matters of the mission, which we are as a church, if we are going to walk into this year of overflow, which we are as a church, we have to know how all of these work.
See, empathy says, I feel with you, so tell me more.
Right?
We all feel that.
The world says, I don't have time for that.
Gentleness says, I will respond with care.
But the world says, say whatever.
Your feelings don't matter.
Compassion says, I am going to step toward you.
I'm going to sit in that with you.
And the world says, no, no, I'm going to protect me and I'm going to keep my distance.
See, empathy feels, gentleness walks gently and tenderly and carefully and compassion moves.
The problem is not the sheep that we see in our passage in Matthew.
What Jesus sees and in his compassion that he's moved to recognize is that these are sheep without a shepherd.
Is that the sheep's fault?
No.
It's the shepherd's fault.
And so what he's saying wasn't actually an insult to the people.
It was a fact.
It was a diagnosis.
What he says is they were helpless and harassed like a sheep without a shepherd.
We see way back in Numbers 27, 16 and 17 in the Old Testament, it says, may the Lord appoint someone over this community.
So the Lord's people will not be like sheep without a shepherd.
See, this shows that wandering doesn't always mean rebellion.
That's what we take, right?
Now, did the people rebel in the Old Testament?
They did.
They wandered for 40 days and 40 nights because they wanted to not obey.
And Jesus, God in His goodness, gave them all of the things that they needed.
He said, I'll give you fire, I'll give you a cloud, I'll give you whatever, and they were still like selfish.
But then in God's goodness, again, he sends Jesus.
And so there's the distinction between what was happening here in Numbers.
What the people in the Old Testament knew is there is a Messiah coming.
And we know it.
And we believe it.
And so in this scripture, it's saying that they know that the Lord's people will not be like sheep without a shepherd anymore.
Because sometimes that means rebellion, but sometimes it just means that no one's guiding.
No one's protecting.
No one's caring.
In Ezekiel 34, 11, it says, I myself will search for my sheep and look after them.
Again, we see that God does not blame the sheep.
He confronts the shepherd who abandoned them.
And this is sometimes is our humanness.
We have to remember when we say like, we don't deserve God's love and well, you don't know what I've done and God doesn't see me the way that he sees everyone else because I don't deserve it.
Here's the truth.
God's frustration is never aimed at wounded sheep.
It is aimed at absent shepherds.
But here's the problem Christ followers that call ourselves Christians.
We are sometimes the shepherds doing the wounding.
And what we want to say is no compassion, gentleness.
The matters of the mission is what moves me to do the things that I do.
So let's look at the host passes one more time in Matthew 9, 36.
When Jesus saw the crowds, he had compassion on them because they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd.
So in proximity, he sees them.
In empathy, he feels their condition.
In gentleness, he does not shame them.
and showing compassion, he moves to act.
See the love that Jesus had for them that he has for us refuses to stay distant.
And I know that some of you that maybe are new to this Jesus thing, maybe some of you that have followed him a really long time, he's like, no, sometimes I feel him distant.
You wanna know why?
Because you're doing this.
And God's doing this.
And we're doing this.
Why are you not close?
Why are you not coming to my aid?
Why are you not giving me the things that I want?
Why are you not seeing me?
And God's like, I went to the cross.
I've seen you for a long time.
But in our compassion, we stop because the truth is the matter.
We're the ones pushing him away.
Henry now says this.
Compassion asks us to go where it hurts to enter places of pain.
Y'all, we don't want to enter our own pain, right?
It's hard.
Let alone enter someone else's pain or go where it hurts.
So what do we do?
What do we do with this?
We simply move.
We move towards people.
When your kids started to learn to walk, they did it one tiny step at a time.
And guess what they did?
They fell down, they got back up.
They did it again.
And that is what he's asking of us.
If we slow down enough to see the need in the first place.
And if we are brave enough to say, tell me more.
We say that because that's one of the things that we say a lot around here.
And we've told you that it's dangerous.
We've told you that those words
There's a good chance that people will tell you more.
But where's your heart when you hear it?
Because we can't just say it with the hope that they're not gonna actually respond.
We have to say it with the hope that they do.
So as Darren reminded us this morning, the actual definition of compassion is a deep, sympathetic awareness of another's suffering and misfortune.
Combined with a strong desire and motivation to relieve that suffering,
Moving on, just feeling bad to actively wanting to help.
Compassion begins when we stop asking, what is wrong with all these people?
Why is everyone an idiot?
That was my dad's word if he's watching.
And we start asking, what can I do to help?
Now, hear me say this too.
There are 400 people probably in this room.
You are all created to do a thing in God's kingdom that only you can do.
Did you know that?
Not that other people don't have a same skillset, but there was something that you are put on this planet to do, and God wants you to do it, and this is it.
What's something that I can do to help?
Because your thing is not everybody else's thing.
We all don't have the same financial background.
We all don't have the same skillset, and that is what makes us beautiful.
That is what makes this church beautiful.
When we say we are for the city, we have to be for the city.
This is not just words.
If you've not been around Richwoods a long time, we are planting a church in the East Bluff because we are for the city.
And we don't want to just be the church on North Knoxville or a church in Washington or a church on the other side of town that doesn't do what we say.
And so we have to walk that road.
We have to relieve that suffering.
But when we live without the action of compassion, we can quickly and dangerously slip into something that even in the scripture Jesus warns us against.
And what is that?
Indifference or lukewarm.
You know what Jesus says about being lukewarm about following him?
No, thanks.
I either want you in or I want you out.
I want you in, all in or all out, I don't really care.
But this whatever, no.
This in between, no.
This indifference, you're doing nothing for my kingdom when you just play whatever, right?
Whatever is actually a really bad word in my house, I do not let people say it because usually it comes as a jab, right?
What do you wanna do, whatever?
Uh-uh, there's my eye roll, did you see it?
You guys probably couldn't see it, but I did.
Whatever is bad, because I think that you either just say what you mean, or you don't say anything at all, but this indifference is really hard.
See, Ellie Weisel says the opposite of love is not hate, it's indifference.
Indifferent sees pain and is unchanged.
Compassion sees pain and is moved.
What indifference does is make us think things like this.
Well, someone else will handle it.
That's not my responsibility.
Well, I didn't cause that.
I don't have the capacity.
I don't have the time.
I don't have the mental load.
I, I, I, I, I.
Do you know what Jesus is asking?
Stop it with the eyes.
The eyes is what makes us indifferent.
Because it's all about us.
So about what makes us, but what God is asking is, you let me pour into you as a Jesus follower, as the person, as a shepherd, and then you go do the things I'm asking you to do because then it's about the kingdom, it's not about you.
It's about giving glory where glory is due and where is that to our Lord and Jesus Christ.
That's where it's due.
So when we take ourselves out, that is what we see.
And as Darren said, there's no better story that really shows us that action than in Luke with the story of the Good Samaritan.
So I wanted to read it together this morning.
It says, Jesus replied, a man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and he fell among robbers who stripped him and beat him and departed, leaving him half dead.
Now, by chance, a priest was going down the road.
And when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.
So likewise, a Levite
When he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the other side as well.
But a Samaritan, as he journeyed, came to where he was and when he saw him, he had what?
Compassion.
He went to him and he bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and wine, then he sent him on his own animal and brought him to an inn and took care of him.
Now the way that compassion works out in that is the whole arc.
He saw him.
He moved to action.
He could have done one of those few things.
He could have just done this or just done this or just done this, but he walked it all the way because that's where his compassion was.
Now, you've probably heard, there's a good possibility you have heard the Good Samaritan preach multiple times, but this week, what I really was hit by is this idea that the Levite and the priests were actually maybe not cool.
They were indifferent.
Maybe they weren't just being violent or mean because it doesn't say that they were the ones that beat him.
Those were the robbers.
But when they walked by, they just were a little meh.
They were simply unmoved.
They saw and they passed by.
See compassion moves towards pain and indifference walks around it.
For a lot of us, the truth is we are guilty of it.
We are guilty of it.
It is hard to step into messy, but we are messy.
And the hope that we have in Jesus and the idea that this world is not our home should lend itself to stop thinking someone else will do it and start thinking, but God has asked me to do it because that is the truth and he most certainly has.
As a staff member, we say around here, we don't have to do this.
We get to do this and we mean it.
I get to stand up on this stage and share this message with you because that is how God gifted me.
You get to do the things that you get to do because that is where you are.
You get to go to work.
Some of you are like, do I?
You do.
You get.
To have meals with your family, you get to be in your family and on and on and on.
But Jesus asks us a lot of things that we sometimes forget, so I'm just gonna give you a few.
You know what Jesus asks us to do?
Feed His sheep.
Do unto others is we would have done unto ourselves.
We forget that one a lot.
You know what Jesus asks us to do?
Turn the other cheek.
Oof.
You want Jesus to ask us to do?
To be shepherds and love his flock.
Now please hear me say that moving towards compassion is hard, okay?
This isn't like lovely, you know, skipping through the flowers kind of feel.
It just isn't.
It is hard.
But it is what we are created to do.
And when we live like Jesus and we apprentice under him,
We can do it.
You can do it.
You can step into the Missy.
You can step into the hard, why?
Because God is asking you to, and He created you to.
Those are two boxes.
Pretty big ones, already checked.
We can't do and take care of people in a space of indifference.
Mother Teresa says, love cannot remain by itself.
It has no meaning.
Love has to be put into action.
Now compassion and love, we kind of use these intermingled.
We use the word love for different things.
I love tacos and I love my husband.
They mean different things.
So please hear me say that love has to be put into action.
In James 2 16, if one of you says to them, go in peace, keep warm and well fed, but does nothing about their physical need.
What good is it?
It's like someone coming to your door because their car broke down and they walked a mile to your door.
You open it up and they're shivering and cold and you're like, I'll call AA, have a good day.
Right?
It's doing nothing to really see them in the moment.
It's not bringing them a blanket.
It's not saying come inside.
It's saying that's not my problem.
That's not my responsibility and someone else will probably do it.
This is something that was so convicting to me this week.
What God was telling me, and now I'm sharing with you is this.
You don't have to do everything, but you can't do nothing.
Friends, we can't do nothing.
Nothing is not acceptable.
And we are asked to do so much
more.
One of the things is I lead teams and teammates around here and kind of look at those systems is I have people say, well, you probably don't need help.
We need help.
Let me hear that.
Let me let you hear that clear as day.
But you want to know why people think we don't help?
We don't need help?
Because everything runs great.
Everything looks good.
Guess what?
Your kids are taken care of because people serve their three and four times a month.
Right?
Your coffee's hot.
Why?
Because people come in at 730 to do it.
What would it look like if God was calling you to do something in the here and the now that relieves some of that for other people in a sense of compassion?
That you are moved to do something that you're like, it's not my time.
It's not convenient.
I don't want to, whatever it is, to say yes.
That is what we're talking about today.
Now hear me say that that doesn't, I'm not saying that because I want a bunch of people to join teams.
I do want that.
But you want to know why?
Because I feel like that is a huge part of you being a part of this amazing body.
And please hear me say that when you join one of our teams, you are not just a hand.
You are a heart, you are a person, and you are needed to help us find and follow Jesus, which is our mission.
Because we have to support each other in that.
What do we know?
What did we learn?
We can't all do it by ourselves.
Ezekiel and Moses both knew a king was coming.
They were sure of it.
They believed it.
And they were waiting, and then in God's timing, Jesus fulfills the promises of Ezekiel and Moses, because he was the shepherd that they were waiting for.
In John 10, 11, it says, I am the good shepherd, and the good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.
we sometimes have to lay down what is comfortable for our calling.
If you would have said to me 10 years ago that this is where I would be standing, that was a full fledged timeout, no thank you, not my gift, all the things.
What would I be missing if I wasn't living into my calling?
A lot of speaking to four walls because I
Impassionate about sharing the gospel in this way.
And I'm, that's how God made me.
So just like you can't do what you can't do, sometimes you have to do what you have to do.
In T. Wright says, the cross is what happens when God's compassion meets human brokenness.
Sit with that for a minute.
The cross.
The one that our Savior went to on our behalf is what happens because God loved us in all of His goodness and all of His compassion to send His one and only Son to meet our messy, to meet our brokenness.
Do you know how He went to the cross willingly for us?
Yet we can't seem to slow down to even notice someone needs us, let alone move towards it.
See compassion didn't just move Jesus towards us.
It held him there, all the way to the cross.
You know whose sin held Jesus to the cross?
Mine.
Mine past, present, future sin held Jesus to the cross.
Do you know who else is sin?
Yours?
everyone, the entire world.
We serve the most gentle loving God because he did that for us.
And you know what?
I think he might say that he got to do it because he loves us so much.
He knew that was the only way.
He knew he was the bridge that would bridge that gap between us and sin.
And he did it because he got to do it.
And Romans says, while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
This is one of my all-time favorite verses that I remind myself over and over and over when I feel selfish, when I feel like I'm not enough, when I feel like what I'm doing doesn't matter.
Like, wait, wait, wait.
Well, I was still a sinner, which is still today.
Christ died for me.
He loves me that much, which means the compassion doesn't actually begin with us.
It begins with God.
And before Jesus even asked us to move towards anyone else, he's asking and calling us to move towards Him because He moves towards us.
See, Jesus didn't wait for us to clean ourselves up.
That's something else that we hear around here.
Well, and then all these excuses of why I can't do the thing because I'm not old enough, I don't know enough, you don't know what I've done, blah, blah, blah.
No, no, no, no.
That is a lie.
That is a lie of Satan that you do not deserve to serve anywhere in this kingdom because you do.
That is a lie that you can't do something
because you don't have it pulled together.
Here's a noose flash.
None of us have it pulled together.
If I showed some hands, which don't raise them because I know they'd be out there, I'd be like, I barely held it together to get here this morning.
Like you're lucky I'm even here at all.
Yes, but guess what?
You're here.
And I am so glad that you're here.
Jesus didn't wait for us to clean ourselves up.
He stepped into us.
at our worst.
He steps toward us in our worst.
And you know what that looks like?
Sinful, harassed, helpless, wandering, cheap.
Friends, that's who we are without a shepherd.
But guess what we have?
A shepherd.
So we don't have to do that by ourselves.
But also hear me say this morning that if you came in here this morning and you are tired, you are weary, you are tender, please know that we see you.
We recognize that.
If you feel harassed and helpless, we see you.
We recognize that our hearts actually hurt for you.
But also hear me say,
that God also sees you, that God also hears you, that Jesus is the most kind, compassionate man you will ever meet, and he is moving towards you right now, and I do not want you to miss it.
The cross is not just an example to follow, it's a gift to receive.
Anybody else out there?
Really terrible gift receivers?
Some of us are, I'm actually, I feel like one of them.
It's like that awkward open every time someone gives you a gift and don't know where to say thank you and then they're like, you're welcome and then it's like weird.
What I'm saying is this is a gift that you don't have to say anything but yes.
The story doesn't end at the cross.
This is like my favorite part about who Jesus is.
is that he didn't just go to the cross for us.
That's not the end of the story.
See, the resurrection means compassion didn't just forgive us.
It transformed us.
It made us different.
And because of our relationship and who we are in Christ, we don't show compassion to earn God's love because we already have it.
We show compassion because we've been overwhelmed by it.
And it just comes so naturally that it pours out.
And now that same compassion that saves us is what's sending us.
It is sending us out into this city.
Church, we cannot be a church of compassion and empathy and all the things that we've talked about and been for the mission if we don't,
use compassion as just an armor that we wear.
We can't do it.
And we can't do it by ourselves.
In Ephesians 2, 4, and 5, it says, but because of his great love for us, God, who is rich in mercy, made us alive with Christ.
We are alive in Christ, and we are not alive in difference.
So here's the ask.
Here's the ask more than anything for me this morning.
Do not leave here this morning thinking that I said you need to try harder.
I didn't.
And I don't want anybody to hear that.
Because you know what the truth is?
You can try all you want and without Jesus it doesn't matter.
We need to decrease so he can increase.
So it doesn't matter about how hard we try.
So I don't want you to hear me say that, but the ask this morning is that we start to recognize the compassion that Jesus has for us, and we leave here changed today, right now, transformed by the compassion of Christ, and we take that
to our families, and that to our schools, and that to our workplaces, and that to the hurt, and that to the oppressed, and that to the harassed, and that to the hopeless, because we shine the greatest light of Jesus that we possibly can.
Why?
Because he loved us first.
So compassion begins when we stop seeing people's problems to solve, and simply start seeing them as sheep to love.
That.
is my ask of all of us this morning as we live into the mission and we do things with compassion.
Let's pray.
Lord, we are so grateful for who you are.
We thank you for being our good shepherd.
Lord, we know that we cannot do this life without you.
And Lord, right now, we know that you are moving in this place.
Holy Spirit, we know that you are moving
and talking and nudging people's hearts in that guttural level of compassion, even maybe for ourselves.
Lord, we can't love other people the way that you are asking us to love if we can't serve a gentle, compassionate Jesus.
So this morning, Lord, as we sing this next song, I just pray that you
will open hearts that you will break down walls and that you will have people encounter the beautiful, kind, compassionate Jesus that you are.
Because Lord, we can't stay where we are.
We can't do nothing.
You are asking for movement and transformation.
And Lord, we give that to you with open hands.
Where we thank you for loving us and we thank you for the opportunity that we have just to come and worship you.
We pray that all this in Jesus' name, amen.
Would you guys stand so we can worship together?